title: We lost Lavabit, and they can't even say why!
tags: freedom, privacy, USA
date: 2013-08-09
----

Less than a week after FBI successfully hit TorMail (along with other
FreedomHosting sites), the only commercial e-mail provider in US that
promises not to read your e-mail has shut down. These are indeed difficult
times.  There is not much retelling to do as even the operator cannot share
the events that led to the decisions to shut down the service. However, the
fact that they take time to mourn the First Amendment in their final letter
and allegations that Edward Snowden used their services can lead to only one
conclusion: it is no longer legal to enable people to communicate in
private.

> "So it has come to this." -- CaptainStumpy@slashdot.org

I myself had two free accounts on their servers. Fortunately I didn't use
them for anything important. Even if Lavabit comes back ("as an American
company" or otherwise), please consider anything sent to my `@lavabit.com`
addresses to be compromised, do not send anything there anymore, and do not
consider the Lavabit [DKIM] signature a proof that the message came from me
(and just to stress it again, email 'From:' field is trivially spoofed,
anyone can send from any address). So much of bookkeeping.

However, if they do come back in any form that resembles what they used to
be, I am most likely going to become a paid customer. As the folk wisdom
says, the best evidence there can be that a privacy service is good is that
they *have* been raided and sued, but even that did not make them leak. I
expect that Lavabit is going to pass this test, at least for the paid
customers -- if I remember correctly, they are literally unable to sell out
their emails. Chance favors the prepared.

Now, *please* read the original announcement at <https://lavabit.com/>.

EDIT: [Silent circle is preemptively shutting down their e-mail service too](https://silentcircle.wordpress.com/2013/08/09/to-our-customers/)


[DKIM]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DomainKeys_Identified_Mail
